---
title: "A die and all about it"
date: 2025-02-17
---
[hree dice with a configuration of 6 opposite 3 and 5 opposite 4 as used in the Druk Choeding temple]("[C:\Users\olena\Pictures\blog\3 dice.jpg](https://journals.openedition.org/kentron/docannexe/image/2777/img-3-small580.jpg)")
  A small cubic die is so popular in board games, but what is its origin? Where did it come from and how was it used during its long human history? Let's try to find out.  
  A traditional dice is a small cube, typically measuring 1.6 cm on each side. Each side is numbered from one to six and marked with round dots known as pips. The sum of the numbers on opposite sides of a die adds up to seven. Faces 1,2 and 3 share a common vertex and can be arranged either  clockwise or counterclockwise around this vertex. If faces 1, 2, and 3 are positioned in a counterclockwise direction, the die is referred to as a right cube. Conversely, if they are arranged clockwise, it is considered a left cube. Typically, Western dice are right-handed, while Chinese dice are left-handed. Rounded angles are not accidental. The cube acquires a semi-spherical shape, and the surface sliding increases while the die rolls like a ball. The probability of falling out of certain numbers becomes uniform: the influence of the initial position of the cube and the nature of the movement during the throw becomes negligibly small.   
  The historical study of dices relies on archaeological material however these studies often provide incomplete information about how and where the dices were used. This is due to perishable nature of material, which was used in making these artifacts. Cubic dice have been made of bones, stone, wood and clay and have been in use since the third millennium BCE. One of the earliest example of dice is the dice from the settlement Tepe Gawra (northwestern Iraq), which has the numbers 1-6, 2-4, and 3-5.   
